README.md, before:

# Chatbot2k

Chatbot2k is a chatbot application that is able to connect to multiple chat platforms at the same time (currently
supporting Discord and Twitch).

## Features

🔌 Connects to multiple chat platforms (Discord, Twitch)  
🗣️ Can respond to commands (simple command-response system)  
📖 Provides dictionary functionality: When a user message contains a defined keyword (usually an acronym), the bot
responds with the corresponding definition.  
📹 Can trigger video and audio clips based on user commands (soundboard functionality)  
⌨️ Supports defining and invoking script commands written in a custom scripting language
🌐 Web interface that shows a list of possible commands and clips

The main use-case is to use this bot during my own livestreams and on my Discord sever.

## Development

The project is written in Python and uses [astral's uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) as project and package manager. You
need to have it installed to run the project. Install dependencies like this:

```bash
uv sync
```

Use the following command to run the bot locally using uvicorn. This also supports hot-reloading during development:

```bash
uv run uvicorn chatbot2k.main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080 --reload
```

## Scripting Language Reference

A new script command can be added by moderators of broadcasters using the command: `!command add-script !<
command_name> "<script_code>"`

Each script consists of multiple sections:

1. **Stores (optional)**: Each store defines a variable that is persisted in the bot's database. This allows persisting
   state across multiple invocations of the script.
2. **Parameters (optional)**: Define parameters that can be passed to the script when invoked.
3. **Statements**: The actual code that is executed when the script command is invoked.

See below for details on each section.

### Data Types

Currently, the language supports the following data types:

- **Booleans**: The literals `true` and `false`.
- **Numbers**: Integral or floating-point numbers, possibly negative. They are mapped to Python's `float` type.
- **Strings**: Sequences of characters enclosed in single quotes (`'`). They are mapped to Python's `str` type and
  support UTF-8. The allowed escape sequences are:
  - `\'` for single quote
  - `\n` for newline
  - `\\` for backslash

## Keywords

The following keywords are reserved in the scripting language:

- `and`
- `false`
- `LET`
- `not`
- `or`
- `PARAMS`
- `PRINT`
- `STORE`
- `true`

## Identifiers

Identifiers must start with an ASCII letter. They may continue with ASCII letters, digits, or underscores (`_`).
Identifiers are case-sensitive. Identifiers cannot be the same as reserved keywords.

## Stores

Each store is defined like this:

```
STORE <store_name> = <initial_value>;
```

On script creation, this will create a new database entry for the store with the given initial value. The store is
scoped to the script, so multiple scripts can have stores with the same name without interfering with each other.  
`<store_name>` can be any valid identifier that has not been used as a store name in this script before.  
`<initial_value>` can be any valid expression. It may also reference other stores defined earlier in the same script.

Example:

```
STORE a = 0;
STORE b = 10;
STORE c = a + b;
STORE greeting = 'Hello, world!';
```

## Parameters

Parameters are defined like this:

```
PARAM <param_name>, <param_name>, ...;
```

`<param_name>` can be any valid identifier that has not been used as a store name or parameter name in this script before. The data type for every parameter is string.  
When invoking the script command, users must provide values for these parameters.

## Statements

The following statements are supported:

### Variable Definitions

Define a new variable like this:

```
LET <var_name> = <expression>;
```

Each variable is scoped to the script execution, so it will not persist across multiple invocations of the script.  
`<var_name>` can be any valid identifier that has not been used before in this script.  
`<expression>` can be any valid expression, including references to stores, parameters, and previously defined variables.

*Note: Referencing a store will yield its current value from the database, not necessarily its initial value.*

**Example:**

```
LET x = 42;
LET y = x + 10;
LET a = 'Hello, ';
LET b = a + 'world!';
```

### Assignments

You can assign new values stores, parameters, and variables like this:

```
<name> = <expression>;
```

`<name>` can be either a store name, a parameter name, or a variable name that has been defined earlier in the script.  
`<expression>` can be any valid expression, including references to stores, parameters, and variables.

*Note: Store values are persisted to the database after script execution ends successfully. If it fails at runtime, no
changes are made to the stores.*

### Print Statement

You can output text to the chat using the print statement:

```
PRINT <expression>;
```

`<expression>` can be any valid expression. The result will be converted to a string. All prints inside a script
execution are concatenated and sent as a single message to the chat after the script finishes executing.

**Example:**

```
LET number = 42;
PRINT 'The answer is: ';
PRINT number;
```

This will output: `The answer is: 42`

### Expressions

The following expressions are supported:

- **Literals**: Numbers (e.g., `42`, `3.14`, `-7`) and strings (e.g., `'Hello, world!'`)
- **Variable, Parameter and Store References**: Using the name of a variable, parameter, or store to get its current value.
- **Arithmetic Operations**: Addition (`+`), subtraction (`-`), multiplication (`*`), and division (`/`) for numbers. The language supports both `+` and `-` in their unary and binary forms.
- **Comparison Operations**: Equal (`==`), not equal (`!=`), less than (`<`), less than or equal (`<=`), greater than (`>`), greater than or equal (`>=`) for all data types.
- **Logical Operations**: And (`and`), or (`or`), and not (`not`) for boolean values.
- **Ternary Operator**: The conditional expression `condition ? value_if_true : value_if_false` evaluates the condition and returns `value_if_true` if the condition is true, otherwise returns `value_if_false`. Both branches must have the same type.
- **String Concatenation**: Using the `+` operator to concatenate strings.
- **Parentheses**: To group expressions and control the order of evaluation.
- **Conversion to Number**: The prefix `$` operator converts a string to a number. The string must represent a number literal, possibly with a leading `+` or `-`. Applying the operator to a number has no effect.
- **Conversion to String**: The prefix `#` operator converts a number to its string representation. Applying the operator to a string has no effect.
- **Code Evaluation**: The prefix `!` operator evaluates a string as code and returns the result as a string. The evaluated source code must not contain any stores, or parameters. It cannot access any values from the surrounding script context.
- **Function Calls**: Call builtin functions using the syntax `'function_name'(arg1, arg2, ...)`. See the Builtin Functions section below for available functions.

## Builtin Functions

The scripting language provides several builtin functions that can be called using the syntax `'function_name'(arguments...)`. All function names must be specified as string literals. All builtin functions return their result as a string value. This keeps them consistent with calling scripts.

### String Functions

- **`'type'(value)`**: Returns the data type of the value as a string (`'string'`, `'number'`, or `'bool'`).
- **`'length'(str)`**: Returns the length of a string as a number. Requires a string argument.
- **`'upper'(str)`**: Converts a string to uppercase. Requires a string argument.
- **`'lower'(str)`**: Converts a string to lowercase. Requires a string argument.
- **`'trim'(str)`**: Removes whitespace from both ends of a string. Requires a string argument.
- **`'replace'(str, old, new)`**: Replaces all occurrences of `old` with `new` in the string. All arguments must be strings.
- **`'contains'(str, substring)`**: Returns `true` if the string contains the substring, otherwise `false`. Both arguments must be strings.
- **`'starts_with'(str, prefix)`**: Returns `true` if the string starts with the prefix, otherwise `false`. Both arguments must be strings.
- **`'ends_with'(str, suffix)`**: Returns `true` if the string ends with the suffix, otherwise `false`. Both arguments must be strings.

### Math Functions

- **`'abs'(num)`**: Returns the absolute value of a number.
- **`'min'(num1, num2, ...)`**: Returns the minimum of one or more numbers. Accepts any number of arguments.
- **`'max'(num1, num2, ...)`**: Returns the maximum of one or more numbers. Accepts any number of arguments.
- **`'round'(num)`**: Rounds a number to the nearest integer.
- **`'floor'(num)`**: Rounds a number down to the nearest integer.
- **`'ceil'(num)`**: Rounds a number up to the nearest integer.
- **`'sqrt'(num)`**: Returns the square root of a non-negative number.
- **`'pow'(base, exponent)`**: Returns base raised to the power of exponent.

### Utility Functions

- **`'random'(min, max)`**: Returns a random floating-point number between min and max.
- **`'timestamp'()`**: Returns the current Unix timestamp (seconds since epoch) as a number.
- **`'date'(format)`**: Returns the current UTC date/time formatted according to the format string (using Python's `strftime()` format codes).

Commit message:

docs: add documentation for the prefix `?` operator

README.md, after:

# Chatbot2k

Chatbot2k is a chatbot application that is able to connect to multiple chat platforms at the same time (currently
supporting Discord and Twitch).

## Features

🔌 Connects to multiple chat platforms (Discord, Twitch)  
🗣️ Can respond to commands (simple command-response system)  
📖 Provides dictionary functionality: When a user message contains a defined keyword (usually an acronym), the bot
responds with the corresponding definition.  
📹 Can trigger video and audio clips based on user commands (soundboard functionality)  
⌨️ Supports defining and invoking script commands written in a custom scripting language
🌐 Web interface that shows a list of possible commands and clips

The main use-case is to use this bot during my own livestreams and on my Discord sever.

## Development

The project is written in Python and uses [astral's uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/) as project and package manager. You
need to have it installed to run the project. Install dependencies like this:

```bash
uv sync
```

Use the following command to run the bot locally using uvicorn. This also supports hot-reloading during development:

```bash
uv run uvicorn chatbot2k.main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8080 --reload
```

## Scripting Language Reference

A new script command can be added by moderators of broadcasters using the command: `!command add-script !<
command_name> "<script_code>"`

Each script consists of multiple sections:

1. **Stores (optional)**: Each store defines a variable that is persisted in the bot's database. This allows persisting
   state across multiple invocations of the script.
2. **Parameters (optional)**: Define parameters that can be passed to the script when invoked.
3. **Statements**: The actual code that is executed when the script command is invoked.

See below for details on each section.

### Data Types

Currently, the language supports the following data types:

- **Booleans**: The literals `true` and `false`.
- **Numbers**: Integral or floating-point numbers, possibly negative. They are mapped to Python's `float` type.
- **Strings**: Sequences of characters enclosed in single quotes (`'`). They are mapped to Python's `str` type and
  support UTF-8. The allowed escape sequences are:
  - `\'` for single quote
  - `\n` for newline
  - `\\` for backslash

## Keywords

The following keywords are reserved in the scripting language:

- `and`
- `false`
- `LET`
- `not`
- `or`
- `PARAMS`
- `PRINT`
- `STORE`
- `true`

## Identifiers

Identifiers must start with an ASCII letter. They may continue with ASCII letters, digits, or underscores (`_`).
Identifiers are case-sensitive. Identifiers cannot be the same as reserved keywords.

## Stores

Each store is defined like this:

```
STORE <store_name> = <initial_value>;
```

On script creation, this will create a new database entry for the store with the given initial value. The store is
scoped to the script, so multiple scripts can have stores with the same name without interfering with each other.  
`<store_name>` can be any valid identifier that has not been used as a store name in this script before.  
`<initial_value>` can be any valid expression. It may also reference other stores defined earlier in the same script.

Example:

```
STORE a = 0;
STORE b = 10;
STORE c = a + b;
STORE greeting = 'Hello, world!';
```

## Parameters

Parameters are defined like this:

```
PARAM <param_name>, <param_name>, ...;
```

`<param_name>` can be any valid identifier that has not been used as a store name or parameter name in this script before. The data type for every parameter is string.  
When invoking the script command, users must provide values for these parameters.

## Statements

The following statements are supported:

### Variable Definitions

Define a new variable like this:

```
LET <var_name> = <expression>;
```

Each variable is scoped to the script execution, so it will not persist across multiple invocations of the script.  
`<var_name>` can be any valid identifier that has not been used before in this script.  
`<expression>` can be any valid expression, including references to stores, parameters, and previously defined variables.

*Note: Referencing a store will yield its current value from the database, not necessarily its initial value.*

**Example:**

```
LET x = 42;
LET y = x + 10;
LET a = 'Hello, ';
LET b = a + 'world!';
```

### Assignments

You can assign new values stores, parameters, and variables like this:

```
<name> = <expression>;
```

`<name>` can be either a store name, a parameter name, or a variable name that has been defined earlier in the script.  
`<expression>` can be any valid expression, including references to stores, parameters, and variables.

*Note: Store values are persisted to the database after script execution ends successfully. If it fails at runtime, no
changes are made to the stores.*

### Print Statement

You can output text to the chat using the print statement:

```
PRINT <expression>;
```

`<expression>` can be any valid expression. The result will be converted to a string. All prints inside a script
execution are concatenated and sent as a single message to the chat after the script finishes executing.

**Example:**

```
LET number = 42;
PRINT 'The answer is: ';
PRINT number;
```

This will output: `The answer is: 42`

### Expressions

The following expressions are supported:

- **Literals**: Numbers (e.g., `42`, `3.14`, `-7`) and strings (e.g., `'Hello, world!'`)
- **Variable, Parameter and Store References**: Using the name of a variable, parameter, or store to get its current value.
- **Arithmetic Operations**: Addition (`+`), subtraction (`-`), multiplication (`*`), and division (`/`) for numbers. The language supports both `+` and `-` in their unary and binary forms.
- **Comparison Operations**: Equal (`==`), not equal (`!=`), less than (`<`), less than or equal (`<=`), greater than (`>`), greater than or equal (`>=`) for all data types.
- **Logical Operations**: And (`and`), or (`or`), and not (`not`) for boolean values.
- **Ternary Operator**: The conditional expression `condition ? value_if_true : value_if_false` evaluates the condition and returns `value_if_true` if the condition is true, otherwise returns `value_if_false`. Both branches must have the same type.
- **String Concatenation**: Using the `+` operator to concatenate strings.
- **Parentheses**: To group expressions and control the order of evaluation.
- **Conversion to Number**: The prefix `$` operator converts a string to a number. The string must represent a number literal, possibly with a leading `+` or `-`. Applying the operator to a number has no effect.
- **Conversion to String**: The prefix `#` operator converts a number to its string representation. Applying the operator to a string has no effect.
- **Conversion to Boolean**: The prefix `?` operator converts a value to a boolean. For numbers, `0` is converted to `false`, all other numbers to `true`. For strings, only the literals `'true'` and `'false'` can be converted to their respective boolean values. Applying the operator to a boolean has no effect.
- **Code Evaluation**: The prefix `!` operator evaluates a string as code and returns the result as a string. The evaluated source code must not contain any stores, or parameters. It cannot access any values from the surrounding script context.
- **Function Calls**: Call builtin functions using the syntax `'function_name'(arg1, arg2, ...)`. See the Builtin Functions section below for available functions.

## Builtin Functions

The scripting language provides several builtin functions that can be called using the syntax `'function_name'(arguments...)`. All function names must be specified as string literals. All builtin functions return their result as a string value. This keeps them consistent with calling scripts.

### String Functions

- **`'type'(value)`**: Returns the data type of the value as a string (`'string'`, `'number'`, or `'bool'`).
- **`'length'(str)`**: Returns the length of a string as a number. Requires a string argument.
- **`'upper'(str)`**: Converts a string to uppercase. Requires a string argument.
- **`'lower'(str)`**: Converts a string to lowercase. Requires a string argument.
- **`'trim'(str)`**: Removes whitespace from both ends of a string. Requires a string argument.
- **`'replace'(str, old, new)`**: Replaces all occurrences of `old` with `new` in the string. All arguments must be strings.
- **`'contains'(str, substring)`**: Returns `true` if the string contains the substring, otherwise `false`. Both arguments must be strings.
- **`'starts_with'(str, prefix)`**: Returns `true` if the string starts with the prefix, otherwise `false`. Both arguments must be strings.
- **`'ends_with'(str, suffix)`**: Returns `true` if the string ends with the suffix, otherwise `false`. Both arguments must be strings.

### Math Functions

- **`'abs'(num)`**: Returns the absolute value of a number.
- **`'min'(num1, num2, ...)`**: Returns the minimum of one or more numbers. Accepts any number of arguments.
- **`'max'(num1, num2, ...)`**: Returns the maximum of one or more numbers. Accepts any number of arguments.
- **`'round'(num)`**: Rounds a number to the nearest integer.
- **`'floor'(num)`**: Rounds a number down to the nearest integer.
- **`'ceil'(num)`**: Rounds a number up to the nearest integer.
- **`'sqrt'(num)`**: Returns the square root of a non-negative number.
- **`'pow'(base, exponent)`**: Returns base raised to the power of exponent.

### Utility Functions

- **`'random'(min, max)`**: Returns a random floating-point number between min and max.
- **`'timestamp'()`**: Returns the current Unix timestamp (seconds since epoch) as a number.
- **`'date'(format)`**: Returns the current UTC date/time formatted according to the format string (using Python's `strftime()` format codes).
